# Module 3: Visualizing Big Data

- [Module 3: Visualizing Big Data](#module-3-visualizing-big-data)
    - [Demo 1: Creating a Faceted Plot with Overlays using ggplot](#demo-1-creating-a-faceted-plot-with-overlays-using-ggplot)
        - [Scenario](#scenario)
        - [Preparation](#preparation)
        - [Creating a scatter plot](#creating-a-scatter-plot)
        - [Adding an overlay](#adding-an-overlay)
        - [Faceting the plot](#faceting-the-plot)
    - [Demo 2: Generating a histogram with rxHistogram](#demo-2-generating-a-histogram-with-rxhistogram)
        - [Scenario](#scenario)
        - [Preparation](#preparation)
        - [Creating a histogram](#creating-a-histogram)
        - [Creating side-by-side histograms and overlays](#creating-side-by-side-histograms-and-overlays)

## Demo 1: Creating a Faceted Plot with Overlays using ggplot

### Scenario

In this demonstration, you will see how use ggplot with R to create a scatter plot. You will see how to add overlays and facets to the plot.

### Preparation

1. Start the VMs if they are not already running. 
2. Log in to the  VM as **.\\student** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.

### Creating a scatter plot

1. Open your R development environment of choice (RStudio or Visual Studio 2017®).
2. Open the R script **Demo1 - ggplot.R** in the **E:\\Demofiles\\Mod03** folder.
3. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Install packages**. This code loads the **tidyverse** package (including **ggplot2** and **dplyr**), and brings the **tidyverse** library into scope.
4. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Create a data frame containing 2% of the flight delay data**. This code populates a data frame with a small subset of the flight delay data. The rowSelection argument uses the rbinom function to select a random sample of observations.
5. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Generate a plot of Departure Delay time versus Arrival Delay time**. These statements use **ggplot** to create a scatter plot. Note that the **geom_point** method sets an alpha level of 1/50. This helps to highlight the density of the data (the more dense the data points, the darker the plot area). Even with a small subset of the data, it can take a couple of minutes to create this plot.

### Adding an overlay

- Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Fit a regression line to this data**. This code uses the **geom_smooth** function to fit a line to the data. Note that the mapping argument has moved to the **ggplot** function so that it is available to **geom_point** and **geom_smooth**.

### Faceting the plot

1. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Facet by month**. This code uses the **facet_wrap** function to organize the data by month and display the data for each month in a separate panel. Note how the regression line varies slightly between months.
2. Close the R development environment, without saving any changes.

## Demo 2: Generating a histogram with rxHistogram

### Scenario

In this demonstration, you will see how create histograms with overlays.

### Preparation

1. Start the VMs if they are not already running.
2. Log in to the  VM as **.\\student** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.
3. Using **File Explorer**, move to the folder **E:\\Demofiles\\Mod03**, and then double-click the file **FlightDelayData.part01.exe**
4. In the **WinRAR self-extracting archive** dialog box, click **Extract**.

### Creating a histogram

1. Open your R development environment of choice (RStudio or Visual Studio 2017).
2. Open the R script **Demo2 - rxHistogram.R** in the **E:\\Demofiles\\Mod03** folder.
3. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Use the flight delay data**. This code creates an **RxXdfDdata** data source for the **FlightDelayData.xdf** file. This file contains 11.6 million records.
4. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Create a histogram showing the number of flights departing from each state**. This code uses the **rxHistogram** function to display a count of flights for each value of the **OriginState** variable. The **scales** argument is a part of the lattice functionality that underpins **rxHistogram**; your code uses this argument to change the orientation and size of the labels on the x axis.
5. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Filter the data to only count late flights**. This code uses the **rowSelection** argument to only include observations where the **ArrDelay** variable is greater than zero.

### Creating side-by-side histograms and overlays

1. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Flights by Carrier**. This chart shows a histogram of the number of flights for each airline. The code uses the **yAxisMinMax** argument to set the limits of the vertical scale.
2. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Late flights by Carrier**. This chart shows a histogram of the number of delayed flights for each airline. The code uses the **yAxisMinMax** argument to set the limits of the vertical scale to the same as that of the previous chart. Additionally, the **plotAreaColor** argument makes the background transparent; this chart will be used as an overlay.
3. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Display both histograms in adjacent panels**. This code installs the **latticeExtra** package. This package provides functionality that you can use to customize the layout of the panels that display graphs and chart. The code then displays both charts; they appear in adjacent panels. Both charts use the same vertical scale, enabling you to compare the number of flights against the number of delayed flights for each airline.
4. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Overlay the histograms**. This statement uses the + operator to overlay the second chart (with the transparent background) on top of the first, making it even easier to see the proportion of late flights for each airline.
5. Close the R development environment, without saving any changes.

---

©2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
