# Module 1: Microsoft R Server and Microsoft R Client

- [Module 1: Microsoft R Server and Microsoft R Client](#module-1-microsoft-r-server-and-microsoft-r-client)
    - [Lab: Exploring Microsoft R Server and Microsoft R Client](#lab-exploring-microsoft-r-server-and-microsoft-r-client)
    - [Exercise 1: Using R Client in RTVS and RStudio](#exercise-1-using-r-client-in-rtvs-and-rstudio)
        - [Task 1: Start the development environment and create a new R script](#task-1-start-the-development-environment-and-create-a-new-r-script)
        - [Task 2: Use the development environment to examine data](#task-2-use-the-development-environment-to-examine-data)
    - [Exercise 2: Exploring ScaleR functions](#exercise-2-exploring-scaler-functions)
        - [Task 1: Examine the data by using ScaleR functions](#task-1-examine-the-data-by-using-scaler-functions)
    - [Exercise 3: Performing operations on a remote server](#exercise-3-performing-operations-on-a-remote-server)
        - [Task 1: Copy the data to the remote server](#task-1-copy-the-data-to-the-remote-server)
        - [Task 2: Read the data into a data frame](#task-2-read-the-data-into-a-data-frame)
        - [Task 3: Examine the data remotely](#task-3-examine-the-data-remotely)
        - [Task 4: Transfer the results from the remote session](#task-4-transfer-the-results-from-the-remote-session)

## Lab: Exploring Microsoft R Server and Microsoft R Client

## Exercise 1: Using R Client in RTVS and RStudio

### Task 1: Start the development environment and create a new R script


1. Log in to the  VM as **.\\student** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.
2. If you are using RTVS, perform the following steps:
    1. Click the Windows **Start** button, type **Visual Studio 2017**, and then click **Visual Studio 2017**.
    2. In Visual Studio 2017, on the **R Tools** menu, click **Data Science Settings**.
    3. In the **Microsoft Visual Studio** message box, click **Yes**.
    4. On the **File** menu, point to **New**, and then click **File**.
    5. In the **New File** dialog box, in the **Installed** pane, click **R**.
    6. In the center pane, click **R Script**, and then click **Open**.
3. If you are using RStudio, perform the following steps:
    1. Click the Windows **Start** button, click the **RStudio** program group, and then click **RStudio**.
    2. On the **File** menu, point to **New File**, and then click **R Script**.

### Task 2: Use the development environment to examine data

1. Using File Explorer, go to the folder **E:\Labfiles\Lab01**, right-click the file **2000.zip**, and then click **Extract All**.
2. In the **Extract Compressed (Zipped) Folders** dialog box, specify the folder **E:\Labfiles\Lab01**, and then click **Extract**.
3. Return to you R development environment.
4. In the script editor, add the following statement to the R file and run it (press Ctrl + Enter) to set the working directory:

    ```R
    setwd("E:\\Labfiles\\Lab01")
    ```

5. Add the following code to the R file and run it. These statements create a data frame from the 2000.csv file and display the first 10 rows:

    ```R
    flightDataCsv <- "2000.csv"
    flightDataSampleDF <- read.csv(flightDataCsv)
    head(flightDataSampleDF, 10)
    ```

6. Add the following code to the R file and run it. The **mName** function returns the month name given the month number. The code uses the **lapply** function to generate the month name for each row in the data frame. The **factor** function converts this data into a factor. The result is added to the data frame as the **MonthName** column:

    ```R
    mName <- function(mNum) {
        month.name[mNum]
    }

    flightDataSampleDF$MonthName <- factor(lapply(flightDataSampleDF$Month, mName), levels = month.name)
    ```

7. Add the following code to the R file and run it. These statements summarize the data frame and time how long the operation takes before displaying the results:

    ```R
    system.time(delaySummary <- summary(flightDataSampleDF))
    print(delaySummary)
    ```

8. Add the following code to the R file and run it. These statements display the name of each column in the data frame and the number of rows. The code then finds the minimum and maximum flight arrival delay times:

    ```R
    print(names(flightDataSampleDF))
    print(nrow(flightDataSampleDF))
    print(min(flightDataSampleDF$ArrDelay, na.rm = TRUE))
    print(max(flightDataSampleDF$ArrDelay, na.rm = TRUE))
    ```

9. Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code cross tabulates the month name against the number of flights cancelled and not cancelled:

    ```R
    print(xtabs(~MonthName + as.factor(Cancelled == 1), flightDataSampleDF))
    ```

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have used either RTVS or RStudio to examine a subset of the flight delay data for the year 2000.

## Exercise 2: Exploring ScaleR functions

### Task 1: Examine the data by using ScaleR functions

1. Add the following code to the R file and run it. These statements summarize the data frame using the **rxSummary** function and time how long the operation takes:

    ```R
    system.time(rxDelaySummary <- rxSummary(~., flightDataSampleDF))
    print(rxDelaySummary)
    ```

2. Add the following statement to the R file and run it. This statement retrieves the number of variables and observations from the data frame:

    ```R
    print(rxGetInfo(flightDataSampleDF))
    ```

3. Add the following statement to the R file and run it. This statement retrieves the details for each variable in the data frame:

    ```R
    print(rxGetVarInfo(flightDataSampleDF))
    ```

4. Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement calculates the quantiles for **ArrDelay** variable in the data frame. The 0% quantile is the minimum value, and the 100% is the maximum value:

    ```R
    print(rxQuantile("ArrDelay", flightDataSampleDF))
    ```

5. Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement generates a cross tabulation on month name against flight cancellations.

    ```R
    print(rxCrossTabs(~MonthName:as.factor(Cancelled == 1), flightDataSampleDF))
    ```

6. Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement generates a cube of month name against flight cancellations. The data should be the same as that for the cross tabulation. The difference is the format in which it is returned:

    ```R
    print(rxCube(~MonthName:as.factor(Cancelled), flightDataSampleDF))
    ```

    >**Note:** Please note the console output, as this will be compared too in a later exercise.

7. Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement removes the data frame from session memory:

    ```R
    rm(flightDataSampleDF)
    ```

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have used the ScaleR functions to examine the flight delay data for the year 2000, and compared the results against those generated by using the ScaleR functions.

## Exercise 3: Performing operations on a remote server

### Task 1: Copy the data to the remote server

1. Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement creates a remote R session on the server:

    ```R
    remoteLogin(deployr_endpoint = "http://localhost:12800", session = TRUE, diff = TRUE, commandline = TRUE, username = "admin", password = "Pa55w.rd")
    ```

2. Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement pauses the remote session and returns you to the local session:

    ```R
    pause()
    ```

3. Add the following statement to the R file and run it. This statement copies the file 2000.csv to the remote server:

    ```R
    putLocalFile(c("2000.csv"))
    ```

4. Add the following statement to the R file and run it. This statement returns you to the remote session:

    ```R
    resume()
    ```

### Task 2: Read the data into a data frame

1. Add the following code to the R file and run it:

    ```R
    flightDataCsv <- "2000.csv"
    flightDataSampleDF <- read.csv(flightDataCsv)
    ```

2. Add the following code to the R file and run it:

    ```R
    mName <- function(mNum) {
        month.name[mNum]
    }

    flightDataSampleDF$MonthName <- factor(lapply(flightDataSampleDF$Month, mName), levels = month.name)
    ```

3. Add the following code to the R file and run it. Verify that the **MonthName** column appears in the output:

    ```R
    head(flightDataSampleDF, 10)
    ```

### Task 3: Examine the data remotely

1. Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code runs the **rxSummary** function, saves the result in the **rxRemoteDelaySummary** variable, and then displays the data in this variable:

    ```R
    rxRemoteDelaySummary <- rxSummary(~., flightDataSampleDF)
    print(rxRemoteDelaySummary)
    ```

2. Add the following code to the R file and run it:

    ```R
    rxRemoteInfo <- rxGetInfo(flightDataSampleDF)
    print(rxRemoteInfo)
    ```

3. Add the following code to the R file and run it:

    ```R
    rxRemoteVarInfo <- rxGetVarInfo(flightDataSampleDF)
    print(rxRemoteVarInfo)
    ```

4. Add the following code to the R file and run it:

    ```R
    rxRemoteQuantileInfo <- rxQuantile("ArrDelay", flightDataSampleDF)
    print(rxRemoteQuantileInfo)
    ```

5. Add the following code to the R file and run it:

    ```R
    rxRemoteCrossTabInfo <- rxCrossTabs(~MonthName:as.factor(Cancelled == 1), flightDataSampleDF)
    print(rxRemoteCrossTabInfo)
    ```

6. Add the following code to the R file and run it:

    ```R
    rxRemoteCubeInfo <- rxCube(~MonthName:as.factor(Cancelled == 1), flightDataSampleDF)
    print(rxRemoteCubeInfo)
    ```

### Task 4: Transfer the results from the remote session

1. Add the following statement that pauses the remote session to the R file and run it:

    ```R
    pause()
    ```

2. Add the following statement to the R file and run it. This statement copies the remote variables back to the local session:

    ```R
    getRemoteObject(c("rxRemoteDelaySummary", "rxRemoteInfo", "rxRemoteVarInfo", "rxRemoteQuantileInfo", "rxRemoteCrossTabInfo", "rxRemoteCubeInfo"))
    ```

3. Add the following statements to the R file and run them. This code displays the contents of the variables you have just copied. They should match the values from exercise 2:

    ```R
    print(rxRemoteDelaySummary)
    print(rxRemoteInfo)
    print(rxRemoteVarInfo)
    print(rxRemoteQuantileInfo)
    print(rxRemoteCrossTabInfo)
    print(rxRemoteCubeInfo)
    ```

4. Add the following statement to the R file and run it. This statement logs out of the remote session:

    ```R
    remoteLogout()
    ```

5. Save the script as **Lab1Script.R** in the **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab01** folder, and close your R development environment.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have used the ScaleR functions to examine the flight delay data for the year 2000, and compared the results against those generated by using the ScaleR functions.

---

©2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
