# Module 6: Creating and Evaluating Regression Models

- [Module 6: Creating and Evaluating Regression Models](#module-6-creating-and-evaluating-regression-models)
    - [Demo 1: Creating and Examining a Cluster](#demo-1-creating-and-examining-a-cluster)
        - [Scenario](#scenario)
        - [Preparation](#preparation)
        - [Cluster the data](#cluster-the-data)
        - [Create a new cluster with standardized data](#create-a-new-cluster-with-standardized-data)
        - [Determine an optimal value for k](#determine-an-optimal-value-for-k)
    - [Demo 2: Fitting a Linear Model and Making Predictions](#demo-2-fitting-a-linear-model-and-making-predictions)
        - [Scenario](#scenario)
        - [Preparation](#preparation)
        - [Fit a linear model](#fit-a-linear-model)
        - [Make predictions using the model](#make-predictions-using-the-model)
        - [Plot the predicted values](#plot-the-predicted-values)
    - [Demo 3: Modeling using Logistic Regression](#demo-3-modeling-using-logistic-regression)
        - [Scenario](#scenario)
        - [Preparation](#preparation)
        - [Create a logit regression model to predict a binary response variable](#create-a-logit-regression-model-to-predict-a-binary-response-variable)
        - [Evaluate the effects of predictor variables](#evaluate-the-effects-of-predictor-variables)
        - [Generate a ROC curve](#generate-a-roc-curve)

## Demo 1: Creating and Examining a Cluster

### Scenario

In this demonstration, you will see how to create clusters of data in the diamonds sample dataset, and analyze these clusters to determine an optimal value to use for k.

### Preparation

1. Start the VMs if they are not already running. 
2. Log in to the  VM as **.\\student** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.

### Cluster the data

1. Open your R development environment of choice (RStudio or Visual Studio 2017®).
2. Open the R script **Demo1 - clustering.R** in the **E:\\Demofiles\\Mod06** folder.
3. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Cluster the data in the diamonds dataset into 5 partitions by carat, depth, and price**. This code runs the **rxKmeans** function to generate the clusters.
4. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Examine the cluster**. These statements display the distribution of values in the clusters, and the number of iterations that were performed to generate the clusters. Note that the values of the depth variables used in each cluster are all very similar compared to the variation in the carat and price variables. It took 51 iterations of the algorithm to create these clusters.
5. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Assess the variation between clusters**. This code calculates the ratio of the sums of squares between clusters and the total sums of squares for all clusters. The result shows that 95.6% (0.9562775) of the differences are accounted for between clusters, so each cluster appears to be relatively homogenous.
6. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Examine the standard deviations between the cluster variables**. These statements highlight the different scales of each variable, and why the **price**  variable is more influential than **carat** or **depth**.

### Create a new cluster with standardized data

1. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Create a cluster with standardized data**. This code runs the rxKmeans function with a transform to ensure that all variables have the same scale.
2. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Examine the cluster sums of squares**. This time, the ratio of the sums of squares between clusters and the total sums of squares is only 73.6% (0.7356599). There is a bigger variation in each cluster, due to the increased influence of the **depth** and **carat** variables compared to **price**.
3. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Examine the influence of each variable**. The code shows the centroids for each cluster. This time, **depth** has a much greater proportional variation than before, and all variables have the same order of magnitude.

### Determine an optimal value for k

1. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Run a series of models over a range of values of k**. This code runs the **kMeans** function with different values of k from 1 to 20. The code captures the sums of squares ratio for each iteration.
2. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Plot the results**. This code creates a data frame of values of **k** and the sums of squares ratios, and then plots this data on a line graph. You can see the decreasing effects of increasing k. When k reaches 17, the line becomes more or less flat. This suggests that it would not be worth specifying a k value of more than 17. In fact, values from 13 upwards add little variation to the clusters, so 13 might be an optimal value to select for **k**.
3. Close the script without saving changes, but leave your R development environment open for the next demomstration.

## Demo 2: Fitting a Linear Model and Making Predictions

### Scenario

In this demonstration, you will see how to build a linear model using the diamonds dataset, for predicting the price of diamonds.

### Preparation

1. Start the VMs if they are not already running.
2. Log in to the  VM as **.\\student** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.

### Fit a linear model

1. In your R development environment, open the R script **Demo2 - modelling.R** in the **E:\\Demofiles\\Mod06** folder.
2. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Fit a linear model showing how price of a diamond varies with weight**. This code runs the **rxLinMod** function to generate a linear regression model on the diamond data, using the weight of diamonds to derive their prices.

   > **Note**:If the **Updating Loaded Packages** dialog box appears, click **Yes**.

3. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Examine the results**. These statements display information about the model created by the **rxLinMod** function. The coefficients suggest that each carat in weight adds $7,756.43 to the price.
4. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Use a categorical predictor variable**. This code performs another regression using discrete values for the weight. The results show the prices for each weight. It is clear from these results that the relationship between **price** and **weight** is not particularly linear.

### Make predictions using the model

1. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Generate a subset of the data for testing predictions made by using the model**. This code creates a dataset containing only diamonds with the color "H". The dataset contains the carat and price variables (price is included so you can compare the values predicted using this model against the real data).
2. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Make price predictions against this dataset**. This code uses the **rxPredict** function to run predictions using the linear model against the sample dataset.
3. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# View the predictions to compare the predicted prices against the real prices**. This code displays the first 50 rows of the results. Compare the **price_Pred** values against the **price** variable. The discrepancy shows how the linear model is not particularly accurate for this data. You should note that the lower the weight, the greater the discrepancy.
4. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Calculate confidence intervals around each prediction**. This code calculates and displays the upper and lower range for each prediction, and the degree of confidence in terms of the standard deviation.

### Plot the predicted values

1. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Visualize the predicted prices as a line plot**. This code uses the **rxLinePlot** function to visualize the predictions. You should notice the following points:
    - The data plot is very funnel shaped, indicating a wide variation in price as the weight increases. This indicates that price is not solely dependent on weight, and that other factors might be important.
    - The plot tapers up away from the origin for small values of the weight. This makes sense, because even very small diamonds have some value.

2. Close the script, but leave your R development environment open for the next demonstration.

## Demo 3: Modeling using Logistic Regression

### Scenario

In this demonstration, you will see how to build a logit model for predicting whether a customer is likely to default on their mortgage.

### Preparation

1. Start the VMs if they are not already running. 
2. Log in to the  VM as **.\\student** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.

### Create a logit regression model to predict a binary response variable

1. In your R development environment, open the R script **Demo3 - logistic.R** in the **E:\\Demofiles\\Mod06** folder.
2. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Create a logit regression model**. This code runs the **rxLogit** function to generate a logistic model on the mortgage data, using a customer's credit score, number of years in employment, and amount of credit card debt, to assess whether the customer is likely to default on their mortgage.

### Evaluate the effects of predictor variables

1. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Generate predictions that include credit card debt as a predictor variable**. These statements use rxPredict to run predictions about mortgage default using the logit model and the mortgage dataset.
2. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Display the results**. This statement shows the first 50 predictions. The values in the default variable indicate whether the customer is likely to default on their payments (1) or not (0).
3. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Generate predictions a model and predictions that exclude credit card debt**. This statement creates another logit model that excludes credit and runs predictions using this model. The results are appended to the previous results.
4. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Display the results**. This statement shows the first 50 predictions again. Examine the **Model1** and **Model2** columns. The values in these columns show the actual likelihoods of default with and without taking credit card debt into account.

### Generate a ROC curve

1. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Generate the ROC curves for both models**. This code uses **rxRoc** to create the ROC curve for both models created in the previous task.
2. Highlight and run the code under the comment **# Visualize the ROC curve**. The graph shows the true positive rate versus the false positive rate for both models. Note that the area under the curve for the first model is far greater than that of the second model, indicating that it has much more predictive power. The faint white line shows how making random guesses would fare (a straight diagonal line from the origin), and the second model is actually not much better than this. Therefore, it would seem that taking credit card debt into account is an important factor in this model.
3. Close your R development environment without saving changes.

---

©2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
