# Module 1: Microsoft R Server and Microsoft R Client

- [Module 1: Microsoft R Server and Microsoft R Client](#module-1-microsoft-r-server-and-microsoft-r-client)
    - [Demo 1: Using R Client with Visual Studio and RStudio](#demo-1-using-r-client-with-visual-studio-and-rstudio)
        - [Scenario](#scenario)
        - [Preparation](#preparation)
        - [Configure and use RTVS](#configure-and-use-rtvs)
        - [Configure RStudio to work with RClient](#configure-rstudio-to-work-with-rclient)
        - [Perform operations on a remote server](#perform-operations-on-a-remote-server)

## Demo 1: Using R Client with Visual Studio and RStudio

### Scenario

In this demonstration, you will see how to configure RTVS and RStudio to work with R Client. This demonstration shows the Visual Studio Community edition, and the open source version of RStudio desktop.

### Preparation

1. Start the VMs if they are not already running. 
2. Log in to the  VM as **.\\student** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.

### Configure and use RTVS

1. Click the Windows **Start** button, type **Visual Studio 2017**, and then click **Visual Studio 2017**.
2. In **Visual Studio 2017**, on the **R Tools** menu, click **Data Science Settings**.
3. In the **Microsoft Visual Studio** message box, click **Yes**. Visual Studio arranges the IDE with four panes in a layout that resembles that of RStudio.
4. In the **R Interactive** pane, type **mtcars**, and then press Enter. The contents of the **mtcars** sample data frame should appear.
5. Type **mpg <- mtcars[["mpg"]]**, and then press Enter. Notice that the variable **mpg** appears in the **Variable Explorer** window.
6. Click the **R Tools** menu. This menu contains most of the commands that you use for working in the IDE. These include:
    - The **Session** menu, which contains commands that enable you to stop a session and interrupt a long-running R function.
    - The **Plots** menu, which enables you to open new plot windows, and save plots as image files and PDF documents.
    - The **Data** menu, which enables you to import datasets, and manage data sources and variables.
    - The **Working Directory** menu, which enables you to set the current working directory.
    - The **Install Microsoft R Client** command, which downloads and installs R Client if it has not already been configured.
  
7. On the **File** menu, point to **New**, and then click **File**.
8. In the **New File** dialog box, in the **Installed** pane, click **R**. The center pane displays the different types of R file you can create, including documentation and markdown.
9. In the center pane, click **R Script**, and then click **Open**. The source editor window appears in the top left pane.
10. In the source editor window, type **print(mpg)**, and then press Ctrl+Enter. The statement is executed, and the results appear in the **R Interactive** window. You use the source editor window to create scripts of R commands. You can execute a single statement by using Ctrl+Enter, or you can highlight a batch of statements using the mouse and press Ctrl+Enter to run them.
11. Click the **File** menu. This menu contains commands that you can use to save the R script, and load an R script that you had saved previously.

### Configure RStudio to work with RClient

1. Click the Windows **Start** button, click the **RStudio** program group, and then click **RStudio**.
2. In RStudio, on the **Tools** menu, click **Global Options**.
3. In the **Options** dialog box, verify that the **R version** is set to **C:\\Program Files\\Microsoft\\R Client\\R_SERVER**. This is the location of Microsoft R Client. Note that you must download and install R Client separately, before running RStudio.
4. Click **Change**. The **Choose R Installation** dialog box enables you to switch between different versions of R. If you have just installed R Client, use the **Choose a specific version of R** to select it. 
5. Click **Cancel**.
6. In the **Options** dialog box, click **Cancel**.
7. On the **File** menu, point to **New File**, and then click **R Script**. The script editor pane appears in the top right window. Note the following points:
    - As with RTVS, you can use this window to create scripts, and run commands by using Ctrl+Enter.
    - You can also run commands directly from the **Console** window.
    - The **Environment** window displays the variables for the current session.
    - The **Session** menu provides commands that you can use to interrupt R, terminate a session, create a new session (which starts a new instance of RStudio), and change the working directory.

### Perform operations on a remote server

> **Note**: You can perform these tasks either in RTVS or RStudio, according to your preference of IDE.

1. In the script editor window, enter and run (Ctrl+Enter) the following command:

    ```R
    remoteLogin("http://localhost:12800", session = TRUE, diff = TRUE, commandline = TRUE)
    ```

2. In the **Remote Server** dialog box, enter **admin** for the user name, **Pa55w.rd** for the password, and then click **OK**. Verify that the login is successful; the interactive window should display a list of packages that are installed on the client machine but not on the server (you might need to install these if your script uses them), followed by the **REMOTE>** prompt.

    > **Note**: If the **Remote Server** dialog box doesn't appear, it could be hidden behind RStudio or Visual Studio. Minimize your IDE, log in, and then restore the IDE again.

3. In the script editor window, enter and run the following command:

    ```R
    mtcars
    ```

    This command displays the **mtcars** data frame again, but this time it is being run remotely.

4. In the script editor window, enter and run the following command:

    ```R
    firstCar <- mtcars[1, ]
    ```

    This command creates the **firstCar** variable in the remote session. Note that it doesn't appear in the **Variable Explorer/Environment** window.

5. In the script editor window, enter and run the following command:

    ```R
    pause()
    ```

    Notice that the interactive window no longer displays the **REMOTE>** prompt; you are now running in the local session.

6. In the script editor window, enter and run the following command:

    ```R
    print(firstCar)
    ```

    This command should fail with the error message **object 'firstCar' not found**. This occurs because the **firstCar** variable is part of the remote session, not the local one.

7. In the script editor window, enter and run the following command:

    ```R
    getRemoteObject(c("firstCar"))
    ```

    Verify that the interactive window displays the response **TRUE** to indicate that the command succeeded. Also note that the firstCar variable now appears in the **Variable Explorer/Environment** window.

8. In the script editor window, enter and run the following command:

    ```R
    print(firstCar)
    ```

    This command should now succeed, and display the data for the first observation from the remote **mtcars** data frame.

9.  In the script editor window, enter and run the following command:

    ```R
    resume()
    ```

    The **REMOTE>** prompt should reappear in the interactive window. You are now connected to the remote session again.

10. In the script editor window, enter and run the following command:

    ```R
    exit
    ```

    This command closes the remote session and returns you to the local session.

---

©2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.